Previously on the affair...
Welcome to the end of the world.
Do you remember
the first time you saw her?
Like it was yesterday.
I'm noah. by the way.
What are we talking about?
Noah's new book.
Great. I didn't know.
There was enough
to talk about yet.
Well.
I haven't really gotten
too far with it.
Is she flirting with you?
Do you want to get out of here?
I don't want to divorce you.
you asshole!
What... what do you want?
I want you to come home.
It's extraordinary.
I want it in stores
by next fall.
I don't want this life.
I have to leave.
I'm in love with someone else.
You have chosen to divorce.
In what I like to call
a humane way.
I blew up my life
for you. alison.
I don't belong to you.
We're not living in your book.
You can't... Control me.
I'm pregnant.
I don't know
who joanie's father is.
I never want to see you again.
And I thought
she had done it deliberately.
To trap me. make sure
I could never go back to you.
Fuck!
It was a deer.
It was a deer!
Alison. if I don't do something.
They're gonna convict me.
I know. just...
Just tell the truth.
Your honor.
I'm guilty.
I killed scott lockhart.
What the hell are you doing?
Sit down.
Ready to go?
Hey.
Hi. Hey.
How are you feeling?
I'm fine.
Thou preparest a table before me.
In the presence of mine enemies.
Thou anointest my head with oil.
My cup runneth over.
Surely goodness and mercy
shall follow me.
All the days of my life.
And I will dwell in the house
of the lord forever.
We will conclude
our service with a eulogy.
I now invite arthur's son.
Noah solloway.
To share some remembrances
of his beloved father.
Um...
Those of you who knew my dad
will... will know.
That we didn't always
get along so well.
But I-i loved him.
I did love him.
Wh-when I was a boy...
He used to take me fishing
in the... in the lake.
Behind the house
where we grew up. and...
Well.
we both really enjoyed that.
My sister was...
She and my dad were very close.
I think she was...
She was more his type.
But then she left.
Heh.
That was a hard time.
He had a... he had a hard life.
At least I think he did.
To be... to be honest.
I-i never really knew him.
Um...
I always wanted to ask
more questions.
You always think
there's gonna be...
more time. but...
Thank you for coming.
Thank you. mr. Solloway.
for those. um. words.
We will now conclude our service
by singing. at his request.
Arthur's favorite song.
"take me out to the ball game."
Thank you for telling
that story. estelle.
It was beautiful.
I'm sorry.
What is the matter with you?
Nothing.
Hey. there's your dad.
Hey.
Hey. Thanks for coming.
I think granddad
would have liked that.
Short and sweet. No bullshit.
Hel... helen.
thank you so much for coming.
You didn't have to do that.
Well. I knew your father
for 30 years.
And you know. where else
would I be?
Can I talk to you for a second?
Come here. sweetie.
You haven't returned
any of my calls.
I know.
Why not?
I don't know.
I... we need to talk.
About what?
About what we're doing.
About what our new arrangement's
going to be.
Are you still living
at your sister's?
Yes.
Well. will you be getting.
A place of your own?
Eventually.
Do... i don't...
Don't you want someplace.
Where you can be with the kids?
They can come to nina's.
I mean alone.
I don't think they want
to be alone with me.
That's ridiculous.
You're their father.
Stacey's afraid of me.
She's not afraid of you.
She's uncomfortable 'cause she
hasn't seen you in three years.
That's why you need
to spend time with her.
Okay. I'm trying. I swear I am.
It's just... it's... it's been...
It's been two months.
Just give me a break. will ya?
Um...
What about us?
Excuse me.
Here.
We got it.
"Everyone the father gives to me
will come to me."
I will never turn away
anyone who believes in me.
He who raised Jesus christ
from the dead.
Will also give new life
to our mortal bodies.
Through his indwelling spirit.
My heart. therefore. is glad.
And my spirit rejoices.
My body also shall rest in hope.
You will show me
the path of life.
In your presence
there is fullness of joy.
"And in your right hand
are pleasures forevermore."
noah!
Noah!
"The lord lift up
his countenance upon him.
And give him peace."
Amen.
Thank you so much for coming.
Thanks. Yes. of course.
Thank you.
You okay?
That was a lovely service. nina.
Your father would be pleased.
Thanks.
You're coming back to the house.
though. aren't you?
I don't know.
Come on.
The kids. they haven't
seen each other in forever.
Mine are so looking forward
to it.
Do you think we should
come back to the house?
Only if you want to.
It's a school night. so...
right.
This one time.
Their grandfather just died.
The... the kids
should be together.
Nina. she gave her answer.
We should go. Okay.
Martin needs more time
with his homework this semester.
Because he's been coming home
with cs and ds.
And if he fails out
of another school.
He won't get into college.
Thank you for coming.
Helen.
It was good to see you.
His adviser wants to have.
A parent-teacher conference
next week.
I think you should be there too.
When is it?
It's thursday at four.
Okay. I'll try.
Let's go. mom.
Martin. come and say good-bye
to your father.
Martin. did you hear me?
I said. "come and say
good-bye to your... ".
Don't make him. helen. Please.
You have a lovely home.
Thank you.
It's not mine.
You're not the husband?
I'm sorry. whose husband?
I thought you were
nina's husband.
No. no. no. I'm the brother.
The brother.
The brother who went to prison?
You killed him. you know.
With your antics.
He died of a broken heart.
I thought he died of emphysema.
You're a horror.
Excuse me. donna.
I hope you don't mind terribly.
I'm gonna steal my brother.
Where you going?
To grieve.
Come on.
Here.
Muscle relaxants.
How was teaching this week?
It was fine.
You have any fun?
Not really.
That's not the point. is it?
The point is to have a job.
Well. if they like you.
Then... Maybe they'll give you.
A full-time gig
at the end of the semester.
Maybe.
You should really
shave that beard.
You look insane.
Noah. it's a good university.
And you're a convict.
Ex-convict.
Don't you think
that's part of the appeal?
I'm sorry. I'm just...
I'm having a hard time.
Of course you're having
a hard time.
But it's... it's going
to get better.
You just have to stay...
Alive?
I was going to say "positive."
I think jp's tired of
having me around.
Forget jp. I'll take care of it.
He's just tired in general.
It's just been a long summer.
You know. you're the only one
who's every forgiven me. nin.
Well. you forgave me once.
For something
pretty awful. so...
Besides.
I think you're innocent.
I'm not.
How could he never mention it?
What?
You should have asked him.
What is the matter with you?
I would have never
asked him that.
Just calm down.
We're gonna figure it out. okay?
What do you think
we're gonna do. nina?
How do you think we're
gonna pay for this trip?
And for christmas?
It's got to be
some kind of joke.
Your brother?
Your fucking brother?
Everything okay?
Your father's will arrived
this morning.
Okay.
He didn't have much to leave.
He had his house...
Which he left to you.
To me?
Why?
I don't know. noah.
Why don't you tell us?
I don't know either.
You know he hated you?
Jp. No. no. no.
He could barely talk about you.
She's the one.
Who went to see him
every sunday.
She took him to church.
She took him to the doctor's.
She changed his oxygen.
She changed his fuckin' diapers.
You know that we had to pay
for a live-in nurse at the end?
We're in something of a hole.
Here at the moment.
Doesn't matter.
It doesn't?
And why's that?
Because you planted a money tree
in the backyard.
And we can just go out
and pick some fucking bills?
You're embarrassing me.
I am?
Has he even paid
for groceries once?
Once since he's been here?
Just go take a walk. please.
He's just like
your fuckin' father.
Get out!
We needed that house. nina.
We needed it.
Fuck it.
Here. let me.
No. I got it.
I got it.
I'll pick you up at six.
No. I told you. I'll...
I'll find my own place.
You have no money.
I have a little.
I'll manage.
Just... Let me talk to jp. okay?
He will calm down.
I don't want the house.
Just tell jp he can have it.
He can sell it. I don't care.
He can't have it.
Dad left it to you.
I'm never going back there.
nina.
You know that.
He was trying to apologize.
Yeah. well.
it's too late for that.
Fuckhead.
It's way too late for that.
"And so in the end.."
As she watched him
get back into his car.
And drive back
down the mountain.
She couldn't help but wonder.
Would she feel differently
in the morning?
Would she wake up again
with that sense of possibility.
That she'd taken for granted
as a girl?
In other words.
Is this moment the end
of her beginning.
Or the beginning of her end?
She was still
pondering the question.
When she heard
the teakettle whistle.
And turned from the window.
"When she looked back again.
his car was gone."
The end.
Mr. Solloway?
Yeah. th... thanks.
Thanks. audrey.
Questions. comments. concerns?
Charlette?
I thought it was really elegant.
audrey.
I liked the wind imagery.
I felt your narrator's
excitement.
When the weather patterns
changed unexpectedly.
You don't agree. mr. Solloway?
No. charlette. I don't.
I thought it was very dull.
Unless it was
supposed to be a satire.
Was it?
No. No. I didn't think it was.
Unfortunately. all that audrey
has revealed here today.
Is how shockingly unoriginal.
Her inner life actually is.
It would probably behoove you
to turn off your computer.
Get off your couch.
and go outside.
And risk some live.
human interactions.
So you could observe
the idiosyncrasies.
Of actual behavior.
Better yet. leave campus.
Go visit some
struggling neighborhood.
And see real people
try to deal with real problems.
And then go home
and write about that.
Or don't. I don't care.
Just...
just don't bring
your diary in here again.
Who's next?
Why are you crying?
Why was she crying?
You eviscerated her. dude.
Listen. kids. if...
If you want to be a writer.
You better get used to
people hating your work.
Why you got to denigrate
her experience. mr. Solloway?
It's not like your novels
have been paradigms.
Of diverse socioeconomic
representation.
Hi. yeah.
This is. professor solloway.
We spoke about the apartment
you're subletting.
I'm... i'm... i'm right outside now.
Hey.
Noah.
You look great.
Helen. it's okay.
Helen. tell me about the kids.
They're fine.
Are they coming to visit?
Yeah. of course.
I just wanted to come myself
first to make sure.
That it was safe. and...
My god. I can't...
I can't believe you're in here.
It's okay. No. it's not okay.
I can't believe you did this.
Why did you do this?
Somebody needed
to take responsibility.
No. that's not true.
That's not how
the justice system works.
Juries hang.
Murderers go free.
Oj simpson wasn't convicted.
Why the fuck were you?
Well. I didn't want to leave
anything to chance.
Listen. it...
There's nothing
we can do about it now.
You and the kids are safe.
That's all that matters.
I'm gonna get you out of here.
No. you're not.
Yes. I am.
I'm going to speak to my father.
Your father.
Yes. he... he knows the governor.
He helped get him elected.
Maybe he can get
your sentence transmuted.
You mean "commuted"?
This is ridiculous.
You can't be here.
Not that bad. actually.
I have my own cell.
I get plenty of exercise.
I even like some of the guys.
They're very smart.
They've... Led fascinating lives.
Might even use a few of them
for research for my new novel.
This is not
a writers retreat. noah.
You're incarcerated.
Can't it be both?
Helen. don't worry about me.
I'm tougher than you think I am.
And I owe this to you...
After what I put you through.
Maybe this is my way
of wiping the slate clean.
Besides. they're not
gonna keep me here.
For the full three years.
I'll be out before you know it.
And what about me?
What am I supposed to do
while you're in here?
Just wait.
Consider the arthurian
character merlin.
Merlin.
Born to a virgin.
Who had been impregnated
by a devil.
Merlin's internal integration
of the two sides to his soul.
Establishes him as one of our
earliest archetypes for the...
Quel est le mot?
For... hello.
You just popped up
out of nowhere.
What's your name?
Are you in the right place?
No. no. sorry.
I think I'm...
I'm sorry to put you
on the spot.
It's just that I've asked
everyone else.
To introduce themselves.
And I didn't see you there.
I-I'm noah... Solloway.
Bienvenue. monsieur solloway.
Je suis professeur le gall.
So...
Where were we?
Oui.
The struggle.
Merlin... merlin is an archetype.
For the struggle. perhaps. the...
The war. la guerre. oui...
He's an archetype for the war.
Between one's conscious mind.
And its self-destructive
subconscious desire.
In robert de boron's
early version of the tale.
Merlin's virtuous side
overcomes his demonic side.
His holy destiny intact.
Yet a slightly later version
of the exact same tale.
Depicts merlin as
irredeemably tainted.
By his infernal paternity.
His lightness this time
completely destroyed.
By his darkness.
In this post-vulgate version.
We see the fictional shadow self.
Become a manifestation of
the writer's own depravity.
A shadow of a shadow.
Destined to be destroyed
by its creator.
Monsieur solloway.
Attendez. s'il vous plaît.
I'm just so pleased
to finally meet you.
I feel that you and I
are kindred spirits.
Kindred spirits?
Silence is violence!
How so?
No means no!
Silence is violence!
Was there a rape?
I'm not sure.
It's apparently a bit murky.
But I admire them.
these students.
They're adamant when they feel
they're being mistreated.
I was quite surprised.
It's not the same in france.
They're after you too. you know.
Who? The students.
Some of the faculty.
There was a big conversation.
before you arrived.
About whether it was safe
to have you on the campus.
Why?
You just got out of prison. no?
Okay.
And you're a murderer. yes?
Silence is violence!
No means no!
So. are you happy here?
Are you glad you came?
Well. it's...
It's better than prison.
I'll have to remember that
on the days
I'm feeling
particularly depressed.
Why are you depressed?
"Depressed" is probably wrong.
I just feel... Bored. Ennui.
I thought I'd come to america.
And have a grand adventure.
you know?
I'd be at a famous university.
Arguing with passionate students
late into the nights.
And instead. it's. um...
Instead. it's new jersey.
Yes.
Where everyone is just so...
Nice.
Before I began.
I got a kind of a...
A merde...
How do you say?
A sermon from the dean.
About making the students
feel secure.
I thought.
"secure. at a university? Why?"
I don't remember.
Feeling secure
when I was in school. do you?
No. You see?
I said. "monsieur.".
Surely our job
is to challenge them.
"To unsettle. to make them
feel insecure. no?"
No.
Yeah. it wasn't always
like this.
I remember back when I was
teaching high school.
I started noticing
a change after 9/11.
The president
came on the television.
And started talking about
keeping americans safe.
And suddenly all the students
were repeating it.
And these current students.
they're...
They're even younger. and...
And they've grown up.
On a whole rhetoric of s...
noah. are you all right?
Yeah. Yeah...
I'm having a small
dinner party tonight.
Would you like to come?
Sure. Okay.
Très bien.
So sorry I'm late.
Shall we?
You're teaching only
one class. correct?
That's right. yeah.
I... I'm hoping
for more next semester.
How's it going?
Well. I think.
I think it's going well.
No trouble?
Nope.
The job ends in december?
Yes. but... There's a...
There's a possibility
I'll be invited back.
For the spring term.
And if you're not?
I don't know.
It's important that you stay
employed. mr. Solloway.
As part of your rehabilitation.
I know.
Are you waiting for somebody?
No. no. sorry. I ju...
How's your living situation?
You still at your sister's?
No.
No? You moved?
As of today... tonight.
And you didn't feel it was
important that I know?
It... it just happened.
It's student housing.
I'm subletting from...
From an undergraduate.
I need to visit.
I need to see it.
Well. we can go right now
if you like.
I-I got the key. we...
No. I'd rather come by
when you least expect it.
Of course.
Why'd you move?
Trouble with your sister?
No. no. no.
No. I just...
I just wanted to live...
Live closer to work.
Okay. mr. Solloway.
Stay employed.
Don't piss anybody off.
We'll be in touch.
Thanks so much for coming.
It's my job.
They pay me to do this.
Officer santos.
Who... who knows I'm here?
What do you mean?
Well. is there a record of my...
Where I live now?
Or where I work?
On a database anywhere?
Why are you asking?
I'm just wondering if it's...
If it's possible for...
For anybody still
inside fishkill.
To find out my current address?
As in other prisoners?
Of course not.
Or a guard.
Could a guard. for example.
Have access to that information?
Why are you asking. solloway?
Never mind. It's not important.
Is there anything
you need to tell me?
No.
Here. let me walk you out.
Come on. man!
Stop. stop!
Whoa. whoa.
where do you think you...
You gonna have to
pay for that shit.
Here. enough? Is that enough?
Yeah.
We're cool. man.
You're good.
Audrey. I-i didn't know
you'd be here.
Professor le gall is my adviser.
Is she?
Oui.
For god's sakes. audrey.
Nobody is condoning rape.
We're just saying that
the term "sexual assault".
Is so expansively used now.
That it dilutes public outrage.
For the very crime
you're trying to prosecute.
Really. mike?
Because a woman
who cries sexual assault.
Might just be looking
for attention?
Or... or maybe she was confused.
Maybe she really did want it.
Maybe she did. Maybe she did.
And then maybe
she regretted it later.
I mean. I've certainly regretted
sleeping with certain people.
But when I do. I don't bring.
A disciplinary charge
against them.
Fuck you. cornwall.
You know. you ladies...
Not you. professor...
But you two are on a witch-hunt.
No. Excuse me?
Yes. you are.
You are. and I get it.
No. no. no. no. I get it.
You've been victims of
this systematized...
patriarchal.
Oppression for many years now...
stop talking. Just stop talking.
But that doesn't give you
the right to terrorize us.
Terrorize you? Terrorize. yes.
I feel terrified to touch
a woman at a party now.
Especially if she's had a drink.
Because if I take her home.
right.
And I fuck her.
the next morning I wake up.
And I... and I don't tell her
that I-i love her.
Or that I want to marry her.
She can literally prosecute me.
Okay. I stopped listening
at the part where she fucks you.
Because that's where your story
lost all credibility.
Come on. professor.
Blake. back me up here.
He's right.
All this talk of consent
is just demoralizing.
"Demoralizing"?
It's fucking confusing.
It's not that confusing.
Ask her what she wants.
I don't want to ask her.
Why the fuck not?
Because asking isn't sexy.
Professor le gall. you
must have an opinion about this.
Professor le gall is an expert.
In courtly love.
And I'm pretty sure
that lancelot.
Never asked guinevere
for permission to slip it in.
Actually. mike.
if that's what you think.
Then you haven't been
paying enough attention.
In my lectures.
In courtly love.
the woman is always in charge.
She is the lord and master.
And the knight is her servant.
And even when he cannot
consummate his passion.
As is often the case.
The very act of loving her.
Enriches his life...
And improves his nobility.
Imagine that. mike.
A man loving a woman
who he doesn't get to fuck.
That's not true. all right?
You... you said "erotic love."
I wrote down the word "erotic"
in my notebook.
I-I circled it three times.
professor.
But erotic doesn't always
mean physical.
Sometimes the woman
invites the man into her bed.
And he's not allowed
to touch her.
Is there anything more erotic
than that?
You want to know what
my problem is.
With courtly love?
It's just exhausting
for the guys.
Yes. I mean. all those.
Fuckin' ordeals.
To prove their ardor
and commitment.
Joust upon joust upon joust.
Joust!
I mean. stop faking.
Just give me the bacon. baby.
Bacon. That's it.
What's up. right?
What about you.
professor solloway?
Me?
What do you make
of our conversation?
Well. I'm.
I'm fascinated. of course.
Do you know much
about courtly love?
No.
Sexual assault?
There's a chapter
in your last book. descent.
That I've been meaning
to ask you about.
It's the part where you.
Have sex with your wife
against the tree.
Was that supposed to be a rape?
Well. I don't think this
is the appropriate context.
To discuss my book.
No. please.
We're interested.
See. the thing is.
professor solloway.
When we heard that
you were coming to teach.
We were all a little nervous.
I mean. you have to understand.
That your reputation
precedes you.
And I guess I would
just feel a lot safer.
In your class if I understood
your attitude toward consent.
And women in general.
My attitude
towards women in general?
Well. in general. audrey.
I. I-i approve of women.
I think you're all great.
And... and. no.
I did not consider it
to be a... a scene of rape.
What was it. then?
Um...
Dominant sex.
But it wasn't rape? No.
And there's a difference? Yes.
Would you say that lana
consented to that experience?
Well. no. but I'd say
I think she enjoyed it.
Are you fucking kidding me?
My point is. I-i don't...
I think sex can be about both.
Wanting and not wanting.
It's... it's a war.
Between the intellect
and instinct.
Between shame and desire.
And that's what makes it
so interesting. and...
Also. to your first point.
Frankly impossible to legislate.
Merveilleux.
Professor.
he's a rape apologist.
I don't even know why.
We're asking him.
The man basically wrote
a self-help book.
On how to cheat on your wife
and get away with it.
My god.
That's not how I read descent.
Did you read it in english?
Because. believe us.
that book is.
A training manual
for how to be an asshole.
What I read was the account
of a courageous man.
Who falls into a true love.
With a woman who isn't his wife.
And risks everything
to be with her.
A kind of a lancelot.
But perhaps I misunderstood.
Do you mind if I join you?
Want one?
No. thanks.
You don't smoke?
No.
Listen. audrey.
I wanted to apologize.
For the way I treated you
in class today.
It wasn't my best day.
Do you really feel unsafe
in my class?
Is it a possibility
that feeling that way.
Could maybe compel you
to take more risks as a writer?
Take you out
of your comfort zone?
Professor solloway.
What you don't seem
to understand.
About women in general.
Is that we feel unsafe
all the time.
At class. At parties.
Job interviews.
You know.
getting into an elevator.
Parking our cars.
Walking down the street
at night.
I don't need you to push me
out of my comfort zone.
I've never been inside one.
I'm sorry. audrey. i...
I've been away for a long time.
and i... I-i guess
I'm out of practice. I-i...
I've... i've forgotten how to...
Talk to people.
Qu'est-ce qui se passe?
Want a tour?
Yeah.
Sure.
This used to be a boarding house
for wayward women.
Way back at the turn of
the last century.
It's true.
Viola.
What do you think?
This your room?
Yes.
I like it.
I like it too.
It smells familiar.
I don't know what it is.
It reminds me of home.
Were you offended by
the conversation downstairs?
Nah. of course not.
They're all entitled to
their... Opinions.
They're young.
They want everything to be
black and white.
And the tragedy is.
you can't move them beyond that.
No matter how much.
You tell them. no matter
how many books they read.
There are just some things
that can't be taught.
Things like humility and loss.
And desire.
I loved your book.
Thank you.
Is there going to be
another one?
I hope so. eventually.
About the same people?
No. no. No. i...
I mean. it's an old book.
You know?
I'm not writing
that kind of thing anymore.
Why not?
Why. it's... i'm just...
Tell you the truth.
I don't really.
Recognize that author.
People change.
Yeah.
Lucky for you.
You have a paper record.
Of the man you used to be.
Whereas for most of us
that younger person only exists.
In our memory.
I'm glad you're here.
I was beginning to think.
There wasn't anyone interesting
to talk to in all of new jersey.
But... You're a famous author.
And you've been to prison.
Sir thomas malory wrote
le morte d'arthur.
When he was prison.
Did you know that?
No. I didn't.
So you're in good company.
Though many scholars believe
that the charges...
Levied against him...
Were invented.
What's wrong?
I-I don't feel...
I don't feel well.
All of a sudden.
Sit. sit.
No. it's okay.
I-I'll show myself out.
Hi. you've reached
the voicemail of alison and...
joanie. We can't get to.
The phone right now.
So just leave us a message.
And we'll get back
as soon as we can.
Thank you. and have a great day.
Hey. it's me. Um...
I know you told me not to
contact you. but...
But I. um...
I just needed to
hear your voice. so...
And now I have. so...
So...